(PUTTY: open source terminal emulator. It is used to manage UNIX based system from windows)

OSI Model: Open System Interconnection Model 
--------------------------------------------
It describes how the data is transmitted from one computer to another computer in a computer network. (Two or more devices connected via internet).

In the most basic from 2 computers connected using LAN and connectors (RJ45) shares data using Network Interface Card forms Computer Networks.
But if both the computers have different OS its communication happens using the OSI model.

OSI MODEL: It was introduced by International Organization of Standardization
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
It comprises of 7 layers:
1. Application Layer
2. Presentation Layer
3. Session Layer
4. Transport Layer
5. Network Layer
6. DataLink Layer
7. Physical Layer

" Each Layer contains Package of protocols "

1. Application Layer: It provides services to the Network Applications
---------------------
Network Application: Computer Applications that requires Internet.
It contains protocols that helps to make the network applications like chrome, firefox work correctly.

The network applications use application layer protocols. There are dozens of Application Layer protocols 
(HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, SNMP, DHCP, IRC, POP3, TELNET) each having its own functionalities.
1. File Transfer = FTP
2. Web Surfing = HTTP, HTTPS
3. Emails = SMTP
4. Virtual Terminals = Telnet

2. Presentation Layer:
----------------------
- It receives data from Application Layer
- It is in the form of correctors and numbers
- It translates the correctors and numbers into machine understandable code (Translation)
1. Translation
2. Before the data is transmitted the translated bits are reduced (It can be lossy /lossless) - it is done for faster data transmission
3. Encryption - uses SSL Secure Socket Layer (SSL) is used for encryption and decryption in presentation Layer

3. Session Layer: It initiates, manages and terminates the connection ensuring the sending and receiving of the data.
----------------
It uses API's-> NETBIOS - basic i/o system (enables the applications from different computers to communicate with each other)
1. Authentication: Just before the session or connection is established the server performs authentication -> enter username and password.
After authentication Authorization is performed. It tells the user whether they are autorized to access the file.

- It keeps track of the files that are being downloaded.
- Here the data(files) is received in the form of datapackets.
- Hence it is responsible for session management.

NOTE: A WEB BROWSER PERFORM FUNCTIONS OF APPLICATION, PRESENTATION AND SESSION LAYERS.

4. Transport Layer: It controls the reliabilty of communication through segmentation, flow control and error control.
------------------
protocols- TCP and UDP
- Here the data received from the session layer is divided into segments (small data units)
- Each segments contains source and destination's port and sequence number.
  - port number: help to direct to the correct applications
  - sequence number: helps to rearrange the data segments inorder for the receiver to receive the correct data format

Flow control: controls the amt of data being transmitted. (the user uses the transport layer to control the data transmission rate)
Error control: if some data is missed during data transmission -> transport layer uses " Automatic repeat request " schemes to re-transmit the lost data.

services:
1. Connectionles services : it doesn't provide any feedback regarding the data transmission. (DNS, web streams)
2. Connection oriented services: It provides feedback regarding any lost data. (WWW, Email-FTP)

5. NETWORK LAYER: It works for the received data segments to be transported to the computers that are present in different networks.
-----------------
- It receives the data segments from the transport layer.
- Here the data units are called packets formed by adding the ip address of the sender and receiver.
- This is the layer where the routers recide.

Functions:
---------
1. Routing
2. Path Determination : Determines the shortest path for the data delivery
   1. OSPF 2. Border Gateway Protocol 3. IS-IS (intermediate system to intermediate system)
3. Logical Addressing: IP addressing (necessary to transmit the data packets to the correct device in a network)


6. DATALINK LAYER: It is embedded as software in NIC of a computer to provide means to transfer the data from one computer to another computer (local n/w) via local media:cables,cu wire 
------------------                                                                                                                                                         signals
- It receives the data packets from the network layer
- It forms data frame by adding mac address to the data packets (this prcess is called physical addressing)
- It controls how the data is placed and received from the media
NOTE: Mac address is 12 digit alphanumeric number embedded in the network interface card of a number

Services:
1. It allows upper layer of the OSI model access media (using framing techniques)
2. controls of the data is placed and received from media( using Media Access Control, Error Detection)

1. Access the media
Imagine 2 diff host (a laptop and a desktop) communicating with each other. Both the devices are connected to different n/w. They communicate via n/w layer protocol
desktop -> router1 (wired)
laptop -> router 2 (wireless)
router1 - satellite - router2 (connection of the router)
desktop -> data -> laptop

Based on the medium that connects the desktop with router1 the datalink layer adds some data in the head and tail of the ip packet to form a frame
this frame is then sent to router 1 the router 1 decapsulate the frame into ip packet and encapsulate again to a frame so that it crss the satellite link and reach router r2.

router r2 again decapsulate the received frame and encapsulate into a frame to form wireless datalink frame. Laptop recives the wireless datalink frame and decapsulate it 
forward it to the n/w layer. Then to application layer . The application layer makes the data visible to the user screen.

Thus the n/w layer or higher layer of the osi model is able to transmit the data over media using datalink layer.
Hence the datalink layer provides access to media for the higher layer in OSI model.

2. Media Access Control
- The technique that is used get the frame(data) from the media is called media access control
- There are number of devices connected to a common media
- If two more devices connected to common media and send the data at the same time, then there may be possibilty of collision between the two meassages.
- To overcome this the datalink layer keeps an eye on when the shared media is free so the device can transmit the data to the receiver. 
  This is called CSMA (Carrier Sense Multiple Access)
Hence the datalink layer with its media access control techniques controls the data transmission.


7. Physical Layer
-----------------
Segment -> Packets -> Frame -> sequence of bits
Physical Layer converts the binary sequence into signals and transmit over local media
It can be
1. Electrical signal - cu wire
2. Light signal - optical cable
3. Radio signal - AIR

At receiver side the physical layer receives signal ->convert to bits -> Frames -> Datalink layer -> Higher Layers of the OSI model ->
Application Layer protocols makes the data visible to the receiver screen.










 

